# The `degnorm.data_access` module

Once you've run the DegNorm pipeline and obtained an output directory,
there is a lot of raw and estimated coverage matrix data wrapped up in dictionaries stored as .pkl
files. Because we can't determine which genes a researcher will be interested in prior to a DegNorm run,
we provide a couple of easy-to-use functions to grab and visualize the coverage data on the fly.

## `get_coverage_data`

Should you need the raw or DegNorm-estimated coverage matrices generated by a `degnorm` run, the `get_coverage_data`
function can load up individual genes' or every gene's coverage data with the option to save those matrices
to individual .txt files.

    from degnorm.data_access import get_coverage_data
    
    degnorm_dir = '/DegNorm_09022018_214247'

    # pass one or many gene names, load up coverage matrix dictionary
    cov_dat = get_coverage_data('TMEM229B'
                                , degnorm_dir=degnorm_dir)
                                
You can automatically save those coverage matrices as .txt files by specifying the `save_dir` argument. Raw and
estimated coverage matrices are stored in per-chromosome subdirectories as tall DataFrames with sample identifiers serving as the headers.
By setting `save_dir=degnorm_dir`, you can write the .txt files back to the original DegNorm output directory.

    save_dir='FFvsFFPE_data'
        
    cov_dat = get_coverage_data('TMEM229B'
                                , degnorm_dir=degnorm_dir
                                , save_dir=save_dir)
    
    # save all genes' coverage data to .txt files
    cov_dat = get_coverage_data('all'
                                , degnorm_dir=degnorm_dir
                                , save_dir=save_dir)
    
The returned object `cov_dat` is a dictionary whose keys are named after genes, and each gene's value is a dictionary
with `raw` and `estimate` coverage pandas.DataFrame values. 


## `get_coverage_plots`

Should you need coverage plots in addition to the ones generated during a DegNorm pipeline run, `get_coverage_plots`
leverages the coverage matrix data in the .pkl files to make new pre- and post-DegNorm coverage curve plots. Use it similarly
to `get_coverage_data`. Pass one gene, a list of multiple genes, or the string 'all' to plot every gene's coverage. If you're
not saving plots (by using the `save_dir` argument) then this function returns a list of plots.

    from degnorm.data_access import get_coverage_plots

    plots = get_coverage_plots(['SDF4', 'TMEM229B']
                               , degnorm_dir=degnorm_dir)
    plots[0].show()

Most pipeline runs involve 1000s of genes, so rendering a plot for all genes will likely take a bit of time.

You can also save the resulting plots by specifying a `save_dir` argument to the path of a directory where you want to save the plots.
Each gene is saved in a chromosome-level directory. You can still use `genes='all'` to generate a coverage plot for every gene.

    out = get_coverage_plots('all'
                             , degnorm_dir=degnorm_dir
                             , save_dir=degnorm_dir)
